---
title: Announcing WASI 0.2.1
author: "Yosh Wuyts"
github_name: yoshuawuyts
---

_Welcome to the Bytecode Alliance blog. The Bytecode Alliance is a nonprofit
organization dedicated to creating secure new software foundations, building on
standards such as [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/) and [WebAssembly
System Interface (WASI)](https://wasi.dev/)._

Yesterday the W3C WASI Sub-Group (WASI SG) released [WASI
0.2.1](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/releases). This is a non-breaking
release, following the WASI 0.2.0 release in February of this year. In this post
we'll explain what's included in this release, as well as explain how WASI
releases will happen going forward.

For those unfamiliar with WebAssembly (Wasm) components and WASI 0.2, here is a quick, simplified primer: 

* **Core Wasm** is a (virtual) instruction format for programs to be
compiled into (think: x86-64). 
* **Wasm components** are a container format and type
system that wrap Core Wasm instructions into typed, hermetic binaries and libraries (think: ELF). 
* **WASI** is a reserved namespace for a collection of standardized Wasm component interfaces (think: POSIX header files). 

For a more detailed explanation see the [WASI 0.2 announcement post](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2).

## Shipping a release process

In February of this year WASI 0.2.0 was released, nearly five years after the
release of WASI 0.1 (2019). Since then the WASI SG has aimed to both
increase the frequency of WASI releases and reduce the scope of each
release. The idea is that by shipping smaller releases,  new features and fixes
can be shipped more quickly, as well as making it easier for both language
toolchain and runtime implementers to stay up to date.

WASI 0.2.1 is the first release in a series. As a point release, it is entirely
backwards-compatible with all previous versions in the WASI 0.2.x range. It was
released yesterday, August 1st, 2024, which is the first Thursday of the month.
The schedule going forward is to release a new version of WASI every two months,
on the first Thursday of that month. The release schedule for WASI through the
remainder of 2024 is as follows:

| WASI version | Date        |
|--------------|-------------|
| 0.2.1        | 2024-08-01  |
| 0.2.2        | 2024-10-03  |
| 0.2.3        | 2024-12-05  |

The release process so far only covers non-breaking releases of WASI. The WASI
SG intends to eventually release a forever-stable WASI 1.0 release, and at least
one more breaking release before then (WASI 0.3). By shipping smaller features
and bug fixes as part of point releases, the scope of the major versions will be
reduced, which in turn should make them easier to implement and adopt.

## Adopting the `@since` gate notation in WIT

WASI interfaces are defined using Wasm Interface Types (WIT): a versioned,
human-readable format that describes which APIs a Wasm component depends on
(imports) and which APIs it provides (exports). WIT recently added the
capability to annotate which version of a document an API was added in using the
new `@since` gate notation.

WASI 0.2.1 has adopted the `@since` notation for its WIT documents, making them
easier to version over time. Take, for example, the `wasi:random` interface,
which can be used to generate random numbers. In version 0.2.0 of WASI
`wasi:random/random` looked like this:

```wit
package wasi:random@0.2.0;

interface random {
    get-random-bytes: func(len: u64) -> list<u8>;
    get-random-u64: func() -> u64;
}
```

In version 0.2.1 of WASI, each API is now annotated with an additional `@since`
gate, which describes which version the API was introduced in. With those
annotations, the interface now looks like this:

```wit
package wasi:random@0.2.1;

@since(version = "0.2.0")
interface random {
    @since(version = "0.2.0")
    get-random-bytes: func(len: u64) -> list<u8>;
    
    @since(version = "0.2.0")
    get-random-u64: func() -> u64;
}
```

This feature makes it possible for tooling to provide actionable diagnostics and
explainers when dealing with inevitable version mismatches. Since anyone is free
to implement WASI APIs, it's expected that host runtimes and language toolchains
might update to newer versions at a different pace.

Versioning using `@since` is not the only feature being introduced: WASI APIs
are now also making use of an `@unstable` annotation while being developed but
not yet stable. This includes APIs such as CLI: Exit with Code, and Clocks:
Timezone. Landing these APIs as `@unstable` is a required step towards
stability, so it's likely you can expect these APIs to be stabilized in future
WASI releases.

Finally the introduction of `@since` also paves the way for an `@deprecated`
annotation. The WASI 0.2.x family of APIs promises strict
backwards-compatibility, so there needs to be a way to fix mistakes without
breaking any existing users. `@deprecated` has landed in the Wasm Component
model, but is not yet being used by WASI 0.2.1. WASI 0.2.2 (October 2024) will
likely be the first release to make use of `@deprecated`. For more information on how WIT's feature gates work, [see the WIT documentation](https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/blob/main/design/mvp/WIT.md#feature-gates).

## WASI interfaces are now available as OCI images

The WebAssembly Working Group in the CNCF recently published a specification for
how to package up [WebAssembly Components as OCI
Images](https://tag-runtime.cncf.io/wgs/wasm/deliverables/wasm-oci-artifact/).
This makes it possible to encode, publish, and fetch WebAssembly Components from
OCI-compliant registries such as GitHub Packages, Azure Container Registry, and
Google Artifact Registry. WASI 0.2.1 has been released with packages available
to download from the [WebAssembly GitHub
organization](https://github.com/orgs/WebAssembly/packages).

OCI tooling for WebAssembly is still developing, our hope is to make this
integrate seamlessly with both language-native toolchains as well as in
WebAssembly host runtimes. If you'd like to follow the development of our work
on this, you can check out our implementations in
[bytecodealliance/wasm-pkg-tools](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasm-pkg-tools)
or get involved by joining the [Bytecode Alliance Packaging Interest
Group](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/meetings/tree/main/SIG-Packaging).

## Conclusion

In addition to the highlights mentioned in this post, WASI 0.2.1 also includes
six months worth of bug fixes and clarifications in the documentation. The
Bytecode Alliance is excited for this first release of WASI on the release
train, and we're looking forward to the next set of releases.

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the specifications, implementations,
and especially to everyone using WebAssembly. This wouldn't have been possible
without you. Happy release day!
