---
title: "Announcing Jco 1.0"
author: "Yosh Wuyts"
date: "2024-02-22"
github_name: "yoshuawuyts"
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
---

We’re happy to announce the 1.0 release of [Jco][jco]: a native Javascript
WebAssembly toolchain and runtime built for WebAssembly Components and [WASI
0.2](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2) [^wasi-one-liner]. Jco can
natively run Wasm Components inside of Node.js, making it easy to take libraries
written in different programming languages and execute them using the Node.js
runtime. And by implementing the entirety of the WASI 0.2 API surface, those
components can access the network, filesystem, and other system APIs available
in the Node.js runtime.

[^wasi-one-liner]: WebAssembly Components are an extension to WebAssembly to create strongly typed interfaces between different programs. WASI 0.2 is a re-work of the "WebAssembly System Interfaces" based on WebAssembly Components.  The previous version of WASI was not based on components, and as a result was rather limited in what it could express.

<!--end_excerpt-->

Our goal is for Jco to be a comprehensive tool for all Component-related
operations for JavaScript. With Jco 1.0 we're stabilizing a Node.js runtime for
Wasm Components, as well as a toolchain to take Wasm Components written in other
languages and import them into JavaScript. From here on out we hope to continue
stabilizing more features for Jco. Some features are already available
experimentally; this includes native support for the browser, as well as native
support for compiling JavaScript code into WebAssembly. Other features such as
support for the [WebAssembly
registry](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/registry) have not yet started,
but we expect to add later.

## JavaScript Toolchains in the Bytecode Alliance

Jco is the third JS toolchain project which is part of the Bytecode Alliance. To
help people navigate this, here is a quick overview of the three projects and
what their purpose is at the time of writing:

- [Javy](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/javy): A JavaScript → WASI 0.1
compiler toolchain built using the [QuickJS JavaScript
engine](https://bellard.org/quickjs/). This work predates Wasm Components, but
support may be added in the future.
- [ComponentizeJS](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/ComponentizeJS): A
JavaScript → Wasm Component toolchain with full support for WASI 0.2 built
using the [SpiderMonkey JavaScript engine](https://spidermonkey.dev). This
project is newer and not yet considered stable.
- [Jco](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/jco): A comprehensive WebAssembly
Component toolchain and runtime for JavaScript. This includes a Wasm Component →
JS toolchain with full support for WASI 0.2.

## Example

To give you a taste of what it's like to use Jco, let’s compile a little Rust
program to a WASI 0.2.0 component, install Jco for Node.js, and then embed the
newly built component inside of the runtime. If you want to skip ahead to the
final result, you can [view it here](https://github.com/yoshuawuyts/playground-jco).

### Dependencies and Repository

Because we're going to be writing Rust code, and using it from Node.js we expect
you to have both a working [Node.js environment](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm)
and [Rust toolchain](https://rustup.rs) installed. Once you have that, we can
install [`cargo-component`](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/cargo-component)
to build our Rust code, and [Jco][jco] to build it for Node.js.

```bash
$ npm install -g @bytecodealliance/jco        # Install the jco cli tool
$ npm install @bytecodealliance/preview2-shim # Install the jco WASI runtime as a local dep
$ cargo install cargo-component               # Install the `cargo component` subcommand
```

We can then proceed to create a new project repository, which has both Rust and JS code:

```sh
$ cargo component new playground-jco --lib # Create a new Rust component
$ cd playground-jco                        # Enter the newly created project
$ npm init -y                              # Setup a Node.js environment
$ touch index.js                           # Create a JS entrypoint
$ echo node_modules >> .gitignore          # Add node_modules to our .gitignore file
$ cargo add wit_bindgen                    # add cargo crate dependencies
```

This should leave you with a structure that roughly looks like this:

```bash
src/lib.rs      # Our Rust library entry point
wit/world.wit   # Contains our WIT IDL definitions
Cargo.toml      # Configures our Rust project
index.js        # Our JS binary entry point
package.json    # Configures our JS Project
```

And with that out of the way, we're ready to begin writing some code!

### Defining the WIT interface

There are three steps to this project: defining the WIT interface, writing the
Rust code to be exported, and writing the JS code to be imported. We'll be
starting with the WIT interface. For those of you new to Wasm Components: WIT is
an Interface Description Language (IDL) which allows you to describe programming
interfaces in a declarative, language agnostic way. Let's define an interface
which takes a regular string, and converts it to [SHOUTING
CASE!!1!](https://github.com/badboy/stdshout).

```wit
package my-org:wit-playground;

world playground {
  export scream: func(input: string) -> string;
}
```

We can save this to the generated `wit/world.wit` file [^cc-gen], and now we
have defined a function `scream` which takes a string, and returns a string. If
this is your first time editing WIT files and you're using VS Code, consider
installing the [WIT
IDL](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bytecodealliance.wit-idl)
package to get editor support for WIT files. And with that, it's time to write
our Rust code!

[^cc-gen]: If you're from the future: `cargo-component` generated this file for us in this location. Since it is not yet advertised as "stable", the output location for WIT files may change. If no `wit/world.wit` file was generated for you, please check a different location to see whether it might be somewhere else.

### Writing a Rust library

As mentioned, we're using the `cargo-component` tool here in this example to
compile our Rust code to Wasm Components. It isn't yet at 1.0, but it does
already work well enough for our purposes. So we'll show you how you can use it
today.  If you're from the future (e.g. not February 2024), please check the
`cargo-component` docs to see whether these instructions have changed, and if so -
follow those instead. The steps we're going to take here are: define a WIT API
definition, generate the Rust bindings to it (e.g. Rust traits), and then
implement those traits to implement the definitions. Even if the exact ways of
doing this may change in the future, conceptually there will still be ways to
do similar things.

First things first: we want `cargo component` to generate the bindings for our
WIT file. This is done via Rust traits, and it will do this automatically when
we compile. This will yield a compiler error, but that's okay - we'll update the
code in a second:

```bash
$ cargo component check
```

This will have generated Rust bindings, which on the current version of
`cargo-component` is places under `lib/bindings.rs`. Don't worry about reading
that code right now - it does a lot of heavy lifting so we don't have to. The
important part is that it provides us with traits which we can implement. So
let's implement those in our code, and write a little upper case function

```rust
mod bindings;                                     // Teach our program about `src/bindings.rs`

use bindings::Guest;                              // Import the trait repr of our WIT world
use wit_bindgen::rt::string::String as WitString; // Import the WIT string type

struct Component;                                 // Define the type to export
impl Guest for Component {                        // Import the WIT world + methods
    fn scream(input: WitString) -> WitString {    // Implement our `scream` method
        let mut s = input.to_uppercase();
        s.push_str("!!1!");
        s.into()
    }
}
```

Now if we re-run `cargo component check`, it should compile without any
warnings. That means we're ready to run:

```bash
$ cargo component build      # Compile our Rust library to a Wasm Component
```

This will have written the generated Wasm code to
`target/wasm32-wasi/debug/playground_jco.wasm`. Once Rust lands support for a
native WASI 0.2 target, expect this to change to
`target/wasm32-wasi-p2/debug/playground_jco.wasm` or similar, as the current set
of workarounds will no longer be needed (important if you're reading this
anytime after March 2024 or so).

### Writing a JavaScript binary

Okay, it's time to use Jco. First we want to take our Rust code, and generate
JS bindings from it. We can do this using the `jco transpile command`. Let's
point it at our newly generated Wasm library, like so:

```bash
$ jco transpile \                                   # Call `jco transpile`
    target/wasm32-wasi/debug/playground_jco.wasm \  # Point it at our Rust library
    -o target/jco                                   # Write the result to `target/jco`
```

On success it will tell you it's generated a number of JS files as part of
its CLI output:

```text
Transpiled JS Component Files:

 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-cli-environment.d.ts      0.09 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-cli-exit.d.ts             0.16 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-cli-stderr.d.ts           0.17 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-cli-stdin.d.ts            0.17 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-cli-stdout.d.ts           0.17 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-clocks-wall-clock.d.ts    0.11 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-filesystem-preopens.d.ts   0.2 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-filesystem-types.d.ts     2.71 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-io-error.d.ts             0.08 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-io-streams.d.ts           0.58 KiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.core.wasm                  1.83 MiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.core2.wasm                 16.5 KiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.d.ts                       0.72 KiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.js                           40 KiB
```

The next step is to import this into our Node.js file. In order to do this, we
first have to update our `package.json` to declare that we're writing an ES
module. In our `package.json` set the field `"type"` to `"module"`:

```json
{
  "name": "playground-jco",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "type": "module",          // ← Add this line
  // ...
}
```

And then finally, we're ready to write some JS code. we're going to import the
`scream` function from our Rust library, pass it a string, and then print the
output of the string.

```js
import { scream } from "./target/jco/playground_jco.js";

let msg = scream("chashu would like some tuna");
console.log(msg);
```

Now if we run this using `node index.js`, we should get the following output:

```text
CHASHU WOULD LIKE SOME TUNA!!1!
```

And with that, we've successfully written our first Rust component for Node.js.
You can give yourself a little round of applause - because this is *incredibly
cool*! By leveraging WIT and Wasm, we've been able to define a language-agnostic
interface which resulted in strongly typed code for both programming languages.
And by leveraging code generation, all of the hard FFI and data marshalling bits
have been handled for us - enabling us to focus on what is truly important
(screaming we want tuna).

In this example we happened to use JavaScript and Rust in order to demo the Jco
runtime. But what's important to understand is that this could have just as
easily been using JavaScript and Go. Or Rust and Python. The point of the Wasm
Components and WASI is that we can connect any number of languages to each other
via a strongly typed ABI.

We've intentionally kept things fairly simple: one method which takes strings
in, and returns strings out. However the [latest version of
WASI](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2) (0.2) provides among other
things access to asynchronous sockets, timers, and http. Using the same broad
techniques we've shown in this post, it should be possible to for example write
your networked applications using different languages, all linked to one another
using strongly typed WIT interfaces.

## Conclusion

In this post we’ve introduced Jco 1.0.0: a native JavaScript runtime which can
run WASI 0.2 components. We’ve discussed what has been stabilized, which
features are currently in progress, as well as future directions. Finally we’ve
shown an example of how to use Jco to embed a Rust library inside of a Node.js
project.

We're happy to report that several projects in the wild are already succesfully
using Jco to build their projects with. One particularly impressive project 
is by the inimitable [Catherine "whitequark"](https://github.com/whitequark),
who has [ported the YoWASP FPGA toolchain to the
browser](https://mastodon.social/@whitequark/111632628704217359) using Jco.
[This project](https://vscode.dev/github/YoWASP/toolchain-demo) enables users to
flash FPGA hardware directly from their browser over WebUSB, and even works on
mobile devices.

[Jco][jco] is a Bytecode Alliance project, designed and led by Guy Bedford (Fastly).
The 1.0 release of Jco was made possible with the assistance of Pat Hickey
(Fastly), Wassim Chegham (Microsoft), Dirk Bäumer (Microsoft), and Yosh Wuyts
(Microsoft). On behalf of the Bytecode Alliance, we’d like to thank everyone who
was involved with the conception, design, and development of Jco. And we’re very
excited for people to be able to start using it in their projects!

[jco]: https://github.com/bytecodealliance/jco
